Doc: Retrieve forecasts via the REST API for power users (#5)
MeteoSwiss/opendata-forecast-data: README.md

[ensemble data assimilation](https://www.meteoswiss.admin.ch/weather/warning-and-forecasting-systems/icon-forecasting-systems/ensemble-data-assimilation.html).

The documentation covers the following topics:

> - [2.1 Model Specification](#21-model-specification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [2.1 Model Specifications](#21-model-specifications)
```

- [2.2 Available Parameters](#22-available-parameters)
- [2.3 Accessing Forecast Data](#23-accessing-forecast-data)
- [2.4 3D Grid Structure and Representation](#24-3d-grid-structure-and-representation)
- [2.5 Accessing Static Grid Information: Height, Longitude, and Latitude](#25-accessing-static-grid-information-height-longitude-and-latitude)
- [2.6 Data Visualisation](#26-data-visualisation)
- [2.7 Accessing REST API](#27-accessing-rest-api)

> ### 2.1 Model Specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.1 Model Specifications
```

#### 2.5.2 How to access the longitude and latitude of a grid point

The CLON/CLAT file stores the longitude and latitude of the center points of each triangle on the horizontal grid.

> ### 🚧  **Temporary Notice Work in Progress **

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 🚧  **Temporary Notice Work in Progress**
```

```
curl -X POST "https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac/v1/search" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
            "collections": [
                "ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2"
            ],
            "forecast:reference_datetime": "2025-03-12T12:00:00Z",
            "forecast:variable": "TOT_PREC",
            "forecast:perturbed": false,
            "forecast:horizon": "P0DT00H00M00S"
        }'
```

Each parameter in the request body serves the following purpose:
- `collections`: Defines the forecast model to use (`ICON-CH1-EPS` or `ICON-CH2-EPS`).
- `forecast:reference_datetime`: Specifies the desired forecast initialization time (e.g., `2025-03-12T12:00:00Z`).
- `forecast:variable`: Indicates the meteorological parameter of interest (`TOT_PREC` for total precipitation, for example).
- `forecast:perturbed`: Boolean flag determining if the data is deterministic (`false`) or ensemble-based.
- `forecast:horizon`: Defines the lead time of the forecast in ISO 8601 duration format (`P0DT00H00M00S` for instant data).

#### 2.7.2 Downloading the Forecast Data

> Upon a successful request, the response will contain a dictionary of metadata, including forecast file links under the assets key. Locate the href field containing the pre-signed URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon a successful request, the response will contain a dictionary of metadata, including forecast file links under the `assets` key. Locate the `href` field containing the pre-signed URL.
```

Download the GRIB file using the following command:
```

> wget -O <desired_filename> “<presigned URL>”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget -O <desired_filename> “<pre-signed URL>”
```

```
Once downloaded, proceed with decoding the GRIB file using the instructions in [Section 2.7.4 Decoding GRIB Files with ecCodes](#274-decoding-grib-files-with-eccodes).

#### 2.7.3 Installing ecCodes and COSMO definitions

Once you have a GRIB file, you need a tool to read it. We recommend installing [ecCodes](https://confluence.ecmwf.int/display/UDOC/How+to+install+ecCodes+with+Python+bindings+in+conda+-+ecCodes+FAQ) from ECMWF.
By default, the GRIB file shows the short names defined by ECMWF. However, the ICON model has its own definitions.
In order to install them, apply the steps below.

> - Clone the GitHub repository [eccodes-cosmo-resources](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources) into folder *nameOfYourFolder*.

Reviewer: To keep the same format for field to be replaced by the user as in the previous section
```suggestion
- Clone the GitHub repository [eccodes-cosmo-resources](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources) into folder `<name_of_your_folder>`.
```

> - Clone the github repository [ecmwf/eccodes](https://github.com/ecmwf/eccodes/) into the same folder *nameOfYourFolder*.

Reviewer: To keep the same format for field to be replaced by the user as in the previous section
```suggestion
- Clone the GitHub repository [ecmwf/eccodes](https://github.com/ecmwf/eccodes/) into the same folder `<name_of_your_folder>`.
```

> ⚠️ **WARNING**:
> Make sure both repositories are in the same folder and run on the same version.

Finally, execute the following command to set the GRIB definition path:

```

> export GRIB_DEFINITION_PATH=pathToNameOfYourFolder/eccodes-cosmo-recources/definitions:pathToNameOfYourFolder/eccodes/definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export GRIB_DEFINITION_PATH=<name_of_your_folder>/eccodes-cosmo-recources/definitions:<name_of_your_folder>r/eccodes/definitions
```

#### 2.5.2 How to access the longitude and latitude of a grid point

The CLON/CLAT file stores the longitude and latitude of the center points of each triangle on the horizontal grid.
### 🚧  **Temporary Notice Work in Progress **
When opening a data set in a jupyter notebook the load function includes fetching the CLON/CLAT values. To retrieve CLON/CLAT without a python environment, see section 2.7.

### 2.6 Data Visualisation

See [jupyter-notebook examples](https://github.com/MeteoSwiss/opendata-nwp-demos).

> ### 2.7 Accessing REST API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.7 Retrieving Forecasts via REST API
```

> It is possible to dowload a GRIB file using the [REST API](https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac/static/spec/v1/apitransactional.html#tag/Data/operation/getAsset).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If users prefer not to use the provided library to load the data, they can retrieve datasets directly via the [REST API](https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac/static/spec/v1/apitransactional.html#tag/Data/operation/getAsset) by following the step-by-step instructions in this section to obtain forecast data for specific models, variables, and other customizable parameters
```

> Start by writing a JSON file with the following settings.
> 
> ```
> {
>     "rest-client.environmentVariables": {
>         "$shared": {
>             "collectionCH2": "ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2",
>             "collectionCH1": "ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch1"
>         },
>         "devt":{
>             "baseUrl": "https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac",
>             "password": "",
>             "username": "",
>             "clientId": ""
>         }
>     }
> }
> ```
> 
> Now install the Visual Studio Code extention "REST Client" and switch to the `devt` environment. Open a .http file, copy the code below and send the HTTP request.
> 
> ```
> POST {{baseUrl}}/v1/search
> Content-Type: application/json
> 
> {
>     "collections": [
>         "{{collectionCH2}}"
>     ],
>     "forecast:reference_datetime": "2025-03-12T12:00:00Z",
>     "forecast:variable": "TOT_PREC",
>     "forecast:perturbed": false,
>     "forecast:horizon": "P0DT00H00M00S"
> }
> ```
> 
> Where
> - `collections` distinguishes between the two models ICON-CH1-EPS and ICON-CH2-EPS,
> - `reference_datetime` defines the date and time of interest (here 2025-03-12 at 12:00:00),
> - `variable` describes the meteorological variable (here TOT_PREC - total precipitation),
> - `perturbed` decides wheather the data is deterministic (set to `False`) or contains multiple ensemble members and
> - `horizon` defines the forecast lead time (P0DT00H00M00S means instant data).
> 
> The response shows a dictonary containing multiple keys. Whithin the key
> `assets` under `<name_of_the_forecast>` locate the URL in `href`. Then open your terminal and run the next command line.
> 
> ```
> wget -O <name_of_the_forecast> “<presigned URL>”
> ```
> 
> The forecast is downloaded into your current directory.

Reviewer: I would suggest adjusting the structure slightly by not starting with the VSCode settings. Instead, you could add a section at the end for users who want to set it up with VSCode
````suggestion
#### 2.7.1 Submitting a POST Request

Filtering and querying forecast data must be done using a **POST** request. To retrieve a forecast, prepare a JSON request payload. Below is an example request body:

```
{
    "collections": [
        "ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2"
    ],
    "forecast:reference_datetime": "2025-03-12T12:00:00Z",
    "forecast:variable": "TOT_PREC",
    "forecast:perturbed": false,
    "forecast:horizon": "P0DT00H00M00S"
}
```

Each parameter serves the following purpose:
- `collections`: Defines the forecast model to use (`ICON-CH1-EPS` or `ICON-CH2-EPS`).
- `forecast:reference_datetime`: Specifies the desired forecast initialization time (e.g., `2025-03-12T12:00:00Z`).
- `forecast:variable`: Indicates the meteorological parameter of interest (`TOT_PREC` for total precipitation, for example).
- `forecast:perturbed`: Boolean flag determining if the data is deterministic (`false`) or ensemble-based.
- `forecast:horizon`: Defines the lead time of the forecast (`P0DT00H00M00S` for instant data).

#### 2.7.2 Sending the Request
Using a tool like `curl`, send the request to the API endpoint:
```
curl -X POST "https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac/v1/search" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d @request.json
```

Alternatively, in Visual Studio Code, install the `REST Client` extension and create an `.http` file with the following content:
```
POST https://sys-data.int.bgdi.ch/api/stac/v1/search
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "collections": [
        "ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2"
    ],
    "forecast:reference_datetime": "2025-03-12T12:00:00Z",
    "forecast:variable": "TOT_PREC",
    "forecast:perturbed": false,
    "forecast:horizon": "P0DT00H00M00S"
}
```
#### 2.7.3 Downloading the Forecast Data
Upon a successful request, the response will contain a dictionary of metadata, including forecast file links under the assets key. Locate the href field containing the pre-signed URL.
Download the GRIB file using the following command:
```
wget -O <name_of_the_forecast> “<presigned URL>”
```
Once downloaded, you can proceed with decoding the GRIB file using the instructions in Section 2.7.4 Decoding GRIB Files with eccodes.
````

> #### 2.7.1 Install eccodes and COSMO definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 2.7.4 Installing ecCodes and COSMO definitions
```

Once you have a GRIB file, you need a tool to read it. We recommend installing eccodes from ECMWF.

> By default the GRIB file shows the short names defined by ECMWF. However, ICON has its own definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the GRIB file shows the short names defined by ECMWF. However, the ICON model has its own definitions.
```

In order to install them, apply the steps below.

> - Clone the github repositroy [eccodes-cosmo-resources](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources) into folder *nameOfYourFolder*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clone the GitHub repository [eccodes-cosmo-resources](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources) into folder *nameOfYourFolder*.
```

- Clone the github repository [ecmwf/eccodes](https://github.com/ecmwf/eccodes/) into the same folder *nameOfYourFolder*.

⚠️ **WARNING**: Make sure both repositories are in the same folder and run on the same version.

> Finally run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, execute the following command to set the GRIB definition path:

```

```
export GRIB_DEFINITION_PATH=pathToNameOfYourFolder/eccodes-cosmo-recources/definitions:pathToNameOfYourFolder/eccodes/definitions
```

> ❗ **NOTE**: Every time you start your terminal, you have to execute the command above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
❗ **NOTE**: This command must be executed every time you start a new terminal session.
```

> #### 2.7.2 Decoding GRIB Files with eccodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 2.7.5 Decoding GRIB Files with ecCodes
```

> In this section we provide a short introduction to decoding GRIB files with the library eccodes. For more information on using eccodes, read the [documentation](https://events.ecmwf.int/event/363/contributions/4110/attachments/2346/4098/intro_grib_decoding_2023-10-31.pdf) of ECMWF.

Reviewer: Replacing the "we"
```suggestion
This section provides a brief introduction to decoding GRIB files using **eccodes**.
For more details, refer to the [ECMWF eccodes documentation](https://events.ecmwf.int/event/363/contributions/4110/attachments/2346/4098/intro_grib_decoding_2023-10-31.pdf). 
```

Use the following commands to

> - get information about the ecCodes installation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check ecCodes installation details:
```

```
codes_info
```

> - list all the GRIB messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- List all the GRIB messages in a file:
```

```
grib_ls filename.grib
```

> - list the GRIB messages, where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Filter GRIB messages based on key-value conditions:
```

```
grib_ls -w key1=value1,key2=value2 filename.grib
```

> - specify a list of keys to be printed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify a list of keys to be printed:
```

```
grib_ls -p key1,key2 filename.grib
```

> - get a detailed view of the content of all GRIB messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get a detailed view of the content of all GRIB messages:
```

```
grib_dump filename.grib
```

> - get a detailed view of the content of GRIB messages, where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get a detailed view of GRIB messages with filters:
```

```
grib_dump -w key1=value1,key2=value2 filename.grib
```

> ⚠️ **WARNING**: Some of the parameters of the ICON Model are not defined in the ECMWF standard. Users who have not installed the COSMO
>  definitions may need to look for a parameter in the
>  [eccodes-cosmo-resources file](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources/blob/master/definitions/grib2/localConcepts/edzw/shortName.def).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ **WARNING**: Some variables in the ICON model are not included in the WMO standard definitions but are instead defined in ICON's local GRIB definitions. If a variable is missing, users should check the [eccodes-cosmo-resources files](https://github.com/COSMO-ORG/eccodes-cosmo-resources/blob/master/definitions/grib2/localConcepts/edzw/shortName.def)
```
